develop: add Django dev guide (#14613)
pingcap/docs: develop/dev-guide-sample-application-python-django.md

Reviewer: Please delete the `develop/dev-guide-outdated-for-django.md` file and add aliases in this file:

```
aliases: ['/tidb/dev/dev-guide-outdated-for-django']
```

---
title: Connect to TiDB with Django

> summary: Learn how to build a Django application with TiDB. This tutorial gives Python sample code snippets that work with TiDB using Django.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
summary: Learn how to build a Django application with TiDB. This tutorial shows Python sample code snippets that work with TiDB using Django.
```

---

# Build a Django App with TiDB

TiDB is a MySQL-compatible database, and [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/) is a popular web framework for Python.

In this tutorial, you can learn how to use TiDB and Django to accomplish the following tasks:

- Set up your environment.
- Connect to your TiDB cluster using Django.
- Build and run your application. Optionally, you can find sample code snippets for basic CRUD operations.

> **Note:**
>

> > This tutorial works with TiDB Serverless, TiDB Dedicated, and TiDB Self-Hosted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> This tutorial works with TiDB Serverless, TiDB Dedicated, and TiDB Self-Hosted clusters.
```

## Prerequisites

To complete this tutorial, you need:

- [Python 3.8 or higher](https://www.python.org/downloads/).
- [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads).
- A TiDB cluster.

> <CustomContent platform="tidb">

Reviewer 3: what are the differences between platform="tidb" and "tidb-cloud"? Seems like the same content.

Author: This document will exists in both TiDB Cloud and TiDB, but the following documentation is only available in TiDB, so there are some differences in link address: 
- https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/quick-start-with-tidb#deploy-a-local-test-cluster
- /quick-start-with-tidb.md#deploy-a-local-test-cluster

<SimpleTab>
<div label="TiDB Serverless">

1. Navigate to the [**Clusters**](https://tidbcloud.com/console/clusters) page, and then click the name of your target cluster to go to its overview page.

2. Click **Connect** in the upper-right corner. A connection dialog is displayed.

3. Ensure the configurations in the connection dialog match your operating environment.

    - **Endpoint Type** is set to `Public`
    - **Connect With** is set to `General`
    - **Operating System** matches your environment.

    > **Tip:**
    >
    > If your program is running in Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL), switch to the corresponding Linux distribution.

4. Click **Create password** to create a random password.

    > **Tip:**
    > 
    > If you have created a password before, you can either use the original password or click **Reset password** to generate a new one.

5. Run the following command to copy `.env.example` and rename it to `.env`:

    ```shell
    cp .env.example .env
    ```

6. Copy and paste the corresponding connection string into the `.env` file. The example result is as follows:

    ```dotenv
    TIDB_HOST='{gateway-region}.aws.tidbcloud.com'
    TIDB_PORT='4000'

>     TIDB_USER='{prefix}.root'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    TIDB_USER='{user}'
```

    TIDB_PASSWORD='{password}'
    TIDB_DB_NAME='test'

>     CA_PATH='{ssl_ca}'  # e.g. /etc/ssl/cert.pem (mac)

Reviewer 3: Could we use the example of linux instead of mac in the annotation?

7. Save the `.env` file.

</div>
<div label="TiDB Dedicated">

1. Navigate to the [**Clusters**](https://tidbcloud.com/console/clusters) page, and then click the name of your target cluster to go to its overview page.

2. Click **Connect** in the upper-right corner. A connection dialog is displayed.

3. Click **Allow Access from Anywhere** and then click **Download TiDB cluster CA** to download the CA certificate.

    For more details about how to obtain the connection string, refer to [TiDB Dedicated standard connection](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidbcloud/connect-via-standard-connection).

4. Run the following command to copy `.env.example` and rename it to `.env`:

    ```shell
    cp .env.example .env
    ```

5. Copy and paste the corresponding connection string into the `.env` file. The example result is as follows:

    ```dotenv
    TIDB_HOST='{host}.clusters.tidb-cloud.com'
    TIDB_PORT='4000'

>     TIDB_USER='{username}'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    TIDB_USER='{user}'
```

>     TIDB_HOST='{host}.clusters.tidb-cloud.com'

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    TIDB_HOST='{host}'
```

---
title: Connect to TiDB with Django

> summary: Learn how to build a Django application with TiDB. This tutorial shows Python sample code snippets that work with TiDB using Django.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: Learn how to connect to TiDB using Django. This tutorial gives Python sample code snippets that work with TiDB using Django.
```

---

> # Build a Django App with TiDB
> 
> TiDB is a MySQL-compatible database, and [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/) is a popular web framework for Python, including a powerful ORM library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Connect to TiDB with Django

TiDB is a MySQL-compatible database, and [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com) is a popular web framework for Python, which includes a powerful Object Relational Mapper (ORM) library.
```

- Follow [Deploy a local test TiDB cluster](/quick-start-with-tidb.md#deploy-a-local-test-cluster) or [Deploy a production TiDB cluster](/production-deployment-using-tiup.md) to create a local cluster.

</CustomContent>
<CustomContent platform="tidb-cloud">

**If you don't have a TiDB cluster, you can create one as follows:**

- (Recommended) Follow [Creating a TiDB Serverless cluster](/develop/dev-guide-build-cluster-in-cloud.md) to create your own TiDB Cloud cluster.
- Follow [Deploy a local test TiDB cluster](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/quick-start-with-tidb#deploy-a-local-test-cluster) or [Deploy a production TiDB cluster](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/production-deployment-using-tiup) to create a local cluster.

</CustomContent>

## Run the sample app to connect to TiDB

This section demonstrates how to run the sample application code and connect to TiDB.

### Step 1: Clone the sample app repository

Run the following commands in your terminal window to clone the sample code repository:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/tidb-samples/tidb-python-django-quickstart.git
cd tidb-python-django-quickstart
```

### Step 2: Install dependencies

> Run the following command to install the required packages (including Django, django-tidb and mysqlclient) for the sample app:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following command to install the required packages (including Django, django-tidb, and mysqlclient) for the sample app:
```

```shell
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

If you encounter installation issues with mysqlclient, refer to the [mysqlclient official documentation](https://github.com/PyMySQL/mysqlclient#install).

#### What is `django-tidb`?

> django-tidb is a TiDB dialect for Django that addresses compatibility issues between TiDB and Django, to install it, you need to select the version that corresponds with your Django version, for example, if you are using `django==4.2.*`, you need to install `django-tidb==4.2.*`, the minor release number do not need to be the same, use the latest minor release of each, for more information, refer to [django-tidb repository](https://github.com/pingcap/django-tidb).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`django-tidb` is a TiDB dialect for Django that resolves compatibility issues between TiDB and Django.

To install `django-tidb`, choose a version that matches your Django version. For example, if you are using `django==4.2.*`, install `django-tidb==4.2.*`. The minor version does not need to be the same. It is recommended to use the latest minor version.

For more information, refer to [django-tidb repository](https://github.com/pingcap/django-tidb).
```

    ```dotenv
    TIDB_HOST='{host}'  # e.g. tidb.xxxx.clusters.tidb-cloud.com
    TIDB_PORT='4000'
    TIDB_USER='{user}'  # e.g. root
    TIDB_PASSWORD='{password}'
    TIDB_DB_NAME='test'
    CA_PATH='{your-downloaded-ca-path}'
    ```

    Be sure to replace the placeholders `{}` with the connection parameters obtained from the connection dialog, and configure `CA_PATH` with the certificate path downloaded in the previous step.

6. Save the `.env` file.

</div>
<div label="TiDB Self-Hosted">

1. Run the following command to copy `.env.example` and rename it to `.env`:

    ```shell
    cp .env.example .env
    ```

2. Copy and paste the corresponding connection string into the `.env` file. The example result is as follows:

    ```dotenv
    TIDB_HOST='{tidb_server_host}'
    TIDB_PORT='4000'
    TIDB_USER='root'
    TIDB_PASSWORD='{password}'
    TIDB_DB_NAME='test'
    ```

    Be sure to replace the placeholders `{}` with the connection parameters, and remove the `CA_PATH` line. If you are running TiDB locally, the default host address is `127.0.0.1`, and the password is empty.

3. Save the `.env` file.

</div>
</SimpleTab>

### Step 4: Initialize the database

> Navigate to the project root directory and run the following command to initialize the database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the root directory of the project, run the following command to initialize the database:
```

```shell
python manage.py migrate
```

### Step 5: Run the sample application

> 1. Start the app in the development mode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run the application in the development mode:
```

    ```shell
    python manage.py runserver
    ```

>     The default port is 8000. If you want to change the port, you can add the port number after the command, for example: `python manage.py runserver 8080`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The application runs on port `8000` by default. To use a different port, you can append the port number to the command. The following is an example:

    ```shell
    python manage.py runserver 8080
    ```
```

> 2. Open your browser and go to `http://localhost:8000/` to see the sample app in action, within the app, you can:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. To access the application, open your browser and go to `http://localhost:8000/`. In the sample application, you can:
```

    - Create a new player.
    - Bulk create players.
    - View all players.
    - Update a player.
    - Delete a player.
    - Trade goods between two players.

## Sample code snippets

You can refer to the following sample code snippets to complete your own application development.

> For complete sample code and how to run it, check out the [tidb-samples/tidb-python-django-quickstart](https://github.com/tidb-samples/tidb-python-django-quickstart.git) repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For complete sample code and how to run it, check out the [tidb-samples/tidb-python-django-quickstart](https://github.com/tidb-samples/tidb-python-django-quickstart) repository.
```

> ### Configure the database connection
> 
> In the file `sample_project/settings.py` add the following code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Connect to TiDB

In the file `sample_project/settings.py`, add the following configurations:
```

```python
DATABASES = {
    "default": {
        "ENGINE": "django_tidb",
        "HOST": ${tidb_host},
        "PORT": ${tidb_port},
        "USER": ${tidb_user},
        "PASSWORD": ${tidb_password},
        "NAME": ${tidb_db_name},
        "OPTIONS": {
            "charset": "utf8mb4",
        },
    }
}

TIDB_CA_PATH = ${ca_path}
if TIDB_CA_PATH:
    DATABASES["default"]["OPTIONS"]["ssl_mode"] = "VERIFY_IDENTITY"
    DATABASES["default"]["OPTIONS"]["ssl"] = {
        "ca": TIDB_CA_PATH,
    }
```

> You need to replace `${tidb_host}`, `${tidb_port}`, `${tidb_user}`, `${tidb_password}`, `${tidb_db_name}` and `${ca_path}` with the actual values of your TiDB cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to replace `${tidb_host}`, `${tidb_port}`, `${tidb_user}`, `${tidb_password}`, `${tidb_db_name}`, and `${ca_path}` with the actual values of your TiDB cluster.
```

### Define the data model

```python
from django.db import models

class Player(models.Model):
    name = models.CharField(max_length=32, blank=False, null=False)
    coins = models.IntegerField(default=100)
    goods = models.IntegerField(default=1)
    created_at = models.DateTimeField(auto_now_add=True)
    updated_at = models.DateTimeField(auto_now=True)
```

> For more information, refer to [Django Models](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/db/models/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, refer to [Django models](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/db/models/).
```

# bulk insert multiple objects
Player.objects.bulk_create([
    Player(name="player1", coins=100, goods=1),
    Player(name="player2", coins=200, goods=2),
    Player(name="player3", coins=300, goods=3),
])
```

For more information, refer to [Insert data](/develop/dev-guide-insert-data.md).

### Query data

```python
# get a single object
player = Player.objects.get(name="player1")

# get multiple objects
filtered_players = Player.objects.filter(name="player1")

# get all objects
all_players = Player.objects.all()
```

For more information, refer to [Query data](/develop/dev-guide-get-data-from-single-table.md).

### Update data

```python
# update a single object
player = Player.objects.get(name="player1")
player.coins = 200
player.save()

# update multiple objects
Player.objects.filter(coins=100).update(coins=200)
```

For more information, refer to [Update data](/develop/dev-guide-update-data.md).

### Delete data

```python
# delete a single object
player = Player.objects.get(name="player1")
player.delete()

# delete multiple objects
Player.objects.filter(coins=100).delete()
```

For more information, refer to [Delete data](/develop/dev-guide-delete-data.md).

## Next steps

> - Learn more usage of Django from [the documentation of django](https://www.djangoproject.com/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Learn more usage of Django from [the documentation of Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/).
```
